# PremData_2025_Upload
A prediction method using SVMs to predict the best performing players in each position in the Premier League.

Football, or soccer in the US, is the most popular sport in the world, and one of its most popular, noteworthy, and lucrative subsets is the Premier League, situated in England. Attracting many of the best players in the world and drawing nearly 200 million viewers every match week (O’Brien et al, 2021), there is a lucrative market for the most closely associated leisure to do with the Premier League: fantasy sports and fantasy betting. Sports betting exists across various sports, but with Fantasy Football, the draw is exponentially greater. With millions of dollars/euros in revenue coming in per month and even per match week, it's worth attempting to replicate and understand prediction models that may aid us in predicting the ways in which players can be predicted to perform the best. 
Using a Support Vector model provides us with the most desirable groundwork to be able to create a model to predict the best performing players in each position, a good starting point to help users create their favored Fantasy Teams prior to each match week. Support Vector Machine, or “SVMs” as we will reference them as throughout this report, is a classification tool that places all relevant data divided by factors in a 3 dimensional plane, and predicts their relative performance based on its proximity to a central measured plane, referred to as the n-plane (Nieto et al, 2021). With the technique, we can quantify and represent its outcomes with a confusion matrix, which then can subsequently be converted with the help of R to create a comprehensive list of players. Here, we try to implement a prediction model and list the top 10 performing players in each of 4 position groups: Goalkeepers, Defenders, Midfielders, and Forwards, using a Support Vector Machine model and its prediction measures. 
	
//Data and Pre-processing//
Our dataset of choice is the Kaggle Fantasy Premier League Dataset 2023-2024 (https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/meraxes10/fantasy-premier-league-dataset-2023-2024). This dataset uses aggregate data from various sites and host platforms that provide Fantasy Football services for the Premier League. The information from all platforms is aggregated on the website “Fantasy Premier League” and then subsequently added to the Kaggle dataset. Using this data, we can begin to create our support vector model, but prior to that, the data requires some cleaning prior to proper usage. 
One of the key identifiable outliers when it comes to processing data regarding professional athletes is the amount of time players receive on the pitch, a.k.a. playing time. If there is no playing time for a player, they would receive a total of 0 points for that given match week. So, to prevent excessive outliers as well as players that would not contribute to our analysis as there would be nothing to predict, adding a filter in R to the main data frame would allow only the players with values in the “minutes” column to be greater than 0. Next, the “position” df classifies each player into one of 4 classifications; “GKP”, “DEF”, “MID” and “FWD” Subsetting the original data frame into 4 subsets that would allow us to conduct our analysis for each unique position. Finally, setting our target variable, total_points, into a numerical factor using the as.factor() command will allow us to conduct our analysis without error. 
//Method and Results//
	Using the subset data frames, we can create our SVM using the radial kernel, which would allow us to create a linear classification model using total_points as the target variable. Our first model would consider all 77 external variables and assess it comparative to the target variable. 
 

	To supplement the output of the main SVM, we created a Naïve Bayes classifier model to reinforce our findings and comparatively analyze our output. 
 
Using the SVM output (with some notably questionable outputs to be addressed later), we can create individual SVMs for each of the 4 subset data frames for each position. Once they are created along with their prediction models, we can then add the outputs as data points in an additional column and then list the outcome of each model to create a top 10 list for each position. For each position, we create a linear classification SVM, using the same radial kernel. For each position, out of the 78 existing variables, we can select variables determined through linear regression models to identify the most impactful variables in the list. For Goalkeepers (GKP) and Defenders (DEF), the most impactful variable was “clean_sheets”, for Midfielders was “assists”, and for Forwards was “goals_scored”. 

//Analysis and Conclusions//
	The first key observation was the noticeable low accuracy that was observed in the initial support vector model; this phenomenon was continually observed throughout all 4 of the subset models as well, as expected. The Naïve Bayes classifier, however, created and managed to predict nearly 57% of the predicted scores, providing us a more accurate representation of the classified and categorized predictions of our data. 
	To assess the reasoning why the SVM displayed such low accuracy at 12.24%, we must recognize three key disclaimers regarding the dataset. The first and most important observation is that the dataset is regularly updated, and at the time of acquisition as well as the current time, the 2023/2024 season has only initially gotten underway with a lot of data missing. As each match day concludes, more acquired points would likely provide a far more accurate model as we can have a more varied sample of data to observe and analyze. The second disclaimer is the dynamic nature of the sport; these are humans at peak performance playing at extremely high intensity, which does entail a high level of strictly controlled, predictable elements about the sport. However, intensity equally plays part to high unpredictability, as at the absolute peak, a plethora of factors may play unpredictably into the wellbeing and performance of the athletes, which directly translate into how many points a player accrues. In the topic of wellbeing, we can arrive at our 3rd disclaimer, which is injuries and player fitness, which is not only extremely dynamic but also often not a) clear public information, and b) impossible to predict. A small incident may injure an otherwise fit, in form player which can derail their season and expected performance noticeably, and not accounting frequency of injury may be a major contributing factor in the strength of our predictions. 
